Detection Methods
There are multiple methods that antivirus
manufacturers use
to detect malicious software.
The most common methods used are
signature-based detection,
heuristic-based detection, and
behavioral-based detection.
Signature-based antivirus detection is
mostly considered a blacklist technology.
An antivirus signature is a continuous
sequence of bytes within malware
that uniquely identifies it.
In other words, the filesystem is scanned
for known malware signatures and if any
are detected, the offending files are
quarantined.
With correct tools, we can bypass
signature-based detection
by simply changing or obfuscating the
contents of a known malicious file
in order to break the identifying byte
sequence.
To address the pitfalls of
signature-based detection,
antivirus manufacturers introduced
additional detection methods
to improve the effectiveness of their
products.
Heuristic-Based Detection is a detection
method that relies on various rules and
algorithms to determine whether or not an
action is considered malicious.
This is often achieved by stepping
through the instruction set of a binary
file or by attempting to decompile and
then analyze the source code.
The idea is to look for various patterns
and program calls,
as opposed to simple byte sequences, that
are considered malicious.
Alternatively, Behavior-Based Detection
dynamically analyzes the behavior
of a binary file.
This is often achieved by executing the
file in question in an emulated
environment, such as a small virtual
machine, and looking for behaviors
or actions that are considered malicious.
Since these techniques do not require a
malware signature,
they can be used to identify unknown
malware, or variations of known malware,
more effectively.
It’s worth noting that the majority of
antivirus developers use a combination of
these detection methods to achieve higher
detection rates.